Govt raises principal's retirement age to 65


 
ags:UGC|Supreme Court|SC|Rajesh Tope|Nagpur University|Mumbai High Court|DNC|AICTE
 
 
NAGPUR: Maharashtra government which was in deep slumber till date over crisis ensuing due to shortage of principals and lecturers in colleges in the state has finally decided to act in order to avoid Supreme Court action. 

The state cabinet on Wednesday formally raised the age limit for the principals from 58 to 65 years while that of lecturers in non-agriculture universities and non-government affiliated colleges has been increased from 60 to 62 years. Similarly, lecturers working with the government-aided colleges would now retire at 62 years instead of 58 years, following the cabinet decision. 

TOI on September 25 last year was first to report this move to be made by the government by citing higher and technical minister Rajesh Tope. Over thousand colleges in Maharashtra are still operating without full time principals/directors. As many as 457 colleges under Nagpur University are functioning without a head even as judgment was delivered on its case and was made applicable all over the state. 

As per academicians, the government's move seems to be a last-ditch effort to salvage pride and avoid embarrassment over SC's deadline which will end on March 12. This move was apparently planned as the universities and colleges were finding it extremely difficult get eligible candidates who meet the prescribed UGC and AICTE guidelines. Interestingly, the UGC and AICTE guidelines mentioned that superannuation age of principals should be 65 years, but the state had reduced it to 60 years. 

The development would provide a big respite for the colleges who were frantically searching for suitable candidates so as to adhere to the Nagpur bench of Mumbai High Court's deadline which was later revised by the apex court many times. The government had even mulled proposals to appoint retired candidates in the vacant posts till suitable candidate was found. 

Academic circles hailed government's decision terming it as "much needed one". "In colleges where principals were on the verge of retirement, they can give them extension for five more years. Those who are not getting the suitable candidates, they could now appoint retired ones," senior academician Baban Taywade said. The DNC principal added there will be stability now in the higher education sector. 

All India Universities (AIU) chairman Pankaj Chande said that the cabinet decision will not have much affect but will help in tiding over the crisis. "Colleges where principals are going to retire would benefit most as their salaries would be borne by the government for five more years. Until now, the colleges used to pay the huge salaries of principals after their retirement. It would provide some solace to the colleges." The Sanskrit University VC further stated that it would help the government to escape SC's wrath but they can't rely on that.